semaines/2023w04.md, before:

---
title: note hebdomadaire de la quatrieme semaine de 2023
date: '2023-01-27'
---

## lire des choses


## ecouter

- [Linus Lee —  at the Boundary of Machine and Mind](https://share.snipd.com/episode/69edf9ec-ab49-45fe-8af1-444375802012)
- [Talking Wastewater Treatment With an Expert, and Ranking the Best Eating Cities in the U.S.](https://share.snipd.com/episode/08269225-ef2b-46ce-a8b4-32fc20995de4)


## lire le web

### pour comprendre les enjeux de l'intelligence artificiel

- [The Consumer AI Era Has Begun](https://www.platformer.news/p/the-consumer-ai-era-has-begun?publication_id=7976&post_id=98512125&isFreemail=false)
- [An A.I. Pioneer on What We Should Really Fear - The New York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/12/26/magazine/yejin-choi-interview.html)
- [Google-Research/Tuning_playbook](https://github.com/google-research/tuning_playbook)
- [Notion, AI, and Me](https://thesephist.com/posts/notion/)
- [How Is You.com Carbon Neutral?](https://about.you.com/hc/faq/how-is-you-com-carbon-neutral/)
- [Join the Hugging Face Community](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/t5)
- [Class transformers.MT5EncoderModel](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/mt5)
- [Do Large Language Models Learn World Models or Just Surface Statistics?](https://thegradient.pub/othello/?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
- [OpenAI : Dans La Tête Des Créateurs De ChatGPT](https://www.lemonde.fr/economie/article/2023/01/21/openai-dans-la-tete-des-createurs-de-chatgpt_6158745_3234.html)
- [Exclusive: ChatGPT Owner OpenAI Projects $1 Billion in Revenue by 2024](https://www.reuters.com/business/chatgpt-owner-openai-projects-1-billion-revenue-by-2024-sources-2022-12-15/)

### pour comprendre les technologies et le capitalisme

- [⚗️ Exercices (De Feuille) De Styles](https://blog.professeurjoachim.com/billet/2023-01-05-exercices-de-feuille-de-styles)
- [Twitter’s Infrastructure Continues to Crumble, Silently](https://daringfireball.net/linked/2023/01/23/twitter-frum-crumbling)
- [Windows Central: ‘Microsoft Has Laid Off Entire Teams Behind Virtual, Mixed Reality, and HoloLens’](https://www.windowscentral.com/microsoft/microsoft-has-laid-off-entire-teams-behind-virtual-mixed-reality-and-hololens)
- [Apple Beefs Up Smartphone Services in “Silent War” Against Google](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2023/01/apple-beefs-up-smartphone-services-in-silent-war-against-google/)
- [Goodreads Plans to Retire API Access, Disables Existing API Keys](https://joealcorn.com/blog/2020/goodreads-retiring-API)
- [Time Series Data on PostgreSQL](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68440130/time-series-data-on-postgresql)
- [The Anti-Capitalist Web](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2023/the-anti-capitalist-web/)
- [Issue 17 – Posting Through It](https://newsletter.mollywhite.net/p/issue-17-posting-through-it?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
- [TikTok’s Secret ‘Heating’ Button Can Make Anyone Go Viral](https://www.forbes.com/sites/emilybaker-white/2023/01/20/tiktoks-secret-heating-button-can-make-anyone-go-viral/)
- [Backpropagating Through Reasoning](https://thesephist.com/posts/backprop-through-reasoning/)
- ["A Recipe Is Just a Directed Acyclic Graph…"](https://bofh.org.uk/2019/03/04/recursive-sql-recipes/)
- [Chartbook #188 Archipelago Capitalism, the Bahamas and FTX](https://adamtooze.substack.com/p/chartbook-188-archipelago-capitalism)
- [As Disney Turns 100, Its Business Is on a Rollercoaster Ride](https://www.economist.com/briefing/2023/01/19/as-disney-turns-100-its-business-is-on-a-rollercoaster-ride)
- [Thoughts on the Python Packaging Ecosystem](https://pradyunsg.me/blog/2023/01/21/thoughts-on-python-packaging/)
- [After Self-Hosting My Email for Twenty-Three Years I Have Thrown in the Towel. The Oligopoly Has Won.](https://cfenollosa.com/blog/after-self-hosting-my-email-for-twenty-three-years-i-have-thrown-in-the-towel-the-oligopoly-has-won.html)
- [Internet Activities of U.S. Users November 2021](https://www.statista.com/statistics/183910/internet-activities-of-us-users/)


### pour comprendre les médias et leur économie

- [Subscribe Wherever You Get Your Content](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2023/subscribe-wherever-you-get-your-content/)
- [Faire Sortir Les Citoyens De Leur Zone De Confort](https://hypernews.co/sortir-citoyens-de-leur-zone-de-confort-polarisation-medias-information/)


### entrenir une certaine faculté à me disperser

- [Bastien Vivès, Les Trucs Et Les Machins](https://www.arretsurimages.net/chroniques/initiales-ds/bastien-vives-les-trucs-et-les-machins)
- [‘Evil’, ‘Peasants’ and ‘Vomit’ – Eva Green’s WhatsApp Messages Exude Star Quality](https://www.theguardian.com/film/2023/jan/24/evil-peasants-and-vomit-eva-greens-whatsapp-messages-exude-star-quality)
- [A Day in the Life of (Almost) Every Vending Machine in the World](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/apr/14/a-day-in-the-life-of-almost-every-vending-machine-in-the-world)
- [Standard Model of Cosmology Survives a Telescope’s Surprising Finds](https://www.quantamagazine.org/standard-model-of-cosmology-survives-jwsts-surprising-finds-20230120/)
- [League of Legends’ Stinker Cinematic Belies a Bigger Trend](https://www.polygon.com/23562774/league-of-legends-brink-of-infinity-cinematic-controversy-explained)

## jouer

Commit message:

rajoute les livres et change le titre

semaines/2023w04.md, after:

---
title: 2023w04
date: '2023-01-27'
---

Je vais passer mon tour cette semaine pour la forme "des joies"/"des peines".
J'ai eu un programme assez chargé et je vois bien comment l'exercice peut aider se reposer mentalement.

## lire des livres

- fini *The Wall of Storms*
- fini *Mostly Harmless Econometrics*
- commencé *The Book of Dust I La belle sauvage*
- commencé *Ducks* de Kate Beaton
- commencé *Cakes, Custard and Category Theory*


## écouter

- [Linus Lee —  at the Boundary of Machine and Mind](https://share.snipd.com/episode/69edf9ec-ab49-45fe-8af1-444375802012) (The Gradient)
- [Talking Wastewater Treatment With an Expert, and Ranking the Best Eating Cities in the U.S.](https://share.snipd.com/episode/08269225-ef2b-46ce-a8b4-32fc20995de4) (The Dave Chang Show)


## lire le web

### pour comprendre les enjeux de l'intelligence artificiel

- [The Consumer AI Era Has Begun](https://www.platformer.news/p/the-consumer-ai-era-has-begun?publication_id=7976&post_id=98512125&isFreemail=false)
- [An A.I. Pioneer on What We Should Really Fear - The New York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/12/26/magazine/yejin-choi-interview.html)
- [Google-Research/Tuning_playbook](https://github.com/google-research/tuning_playbook)
- [Notion, AI, and Me](https://thesephist.com/posts/notion/)
- [How Is You.com Carbon Neutral?](https://about.you.com/hc/faq/how-is-you-com-carbon-neutral/)
- [Join the Hugging Face Community](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/t5)
- [Class transformers.MT5EncoderModel](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/mt5)
- [Do Large Language Models Learn World Models or Just Surface Statistics?](https://thegradient.pub/othello/?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
- [OpenAI : Dans La Tête Des Créateurs De ChatGPT](https://www.lemonde.fr/economie/article/2023/01/21/openai-dans-la-tete-des-createurs-de-chatgpt_6158745_3234.html)
- [Exclusive: ChatGPT Owner OpenAI Projects $1 Billion in Revenue by 2024](https://www.reuters.com/business/chatgpt-owner-openai-projects-1-billion-revenue-by-2024-sources-2022-12-15/)

### pour comprendre les technologies et le capitalisme

- [⚗️ Exercices (De Feuille) De Styles](https://blog.professeurjoachim.com/billet/2023-01-05-exercices-de-feuille-de-styles)
- [Twitter’s Infrastructure Continues to Crumble, Silently](https://daringfireball.net/linked/2023/01/23/twitter-frum-crumbling)
- [Windows Central: ‘Microsoft Has Laid Off Entire Teams Behind Virtual, Mixed Reality, and HoloLens’](https://www.windowscentral.com/microsoft/microsoft-has-laid-off-entire-teams-behind-virtual-mixed-reality-and-hololens)
- [Apple Beefs Up Smartphone Services in “Silent War” Against Google](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2023/01/apple-beefs-up-smartphone-services-in-silent-war-against-google/)
- [Goodreads Plans to Retire API Access, Disables Existing API Keys](https://joealcorn.com/blog/2020/goodreads-retiring-API)
- [Time Series Data on PostgreSQL](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68440130/time-series-data-on-postgresql)
- [The Anti-Capitalist Web](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2023/the-anti-capitalist-web/)
- [Issue 17 – Posting Through It](https://newsletter.mollywhite.net/p/issue-17-posting-through-it?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
- [TikTok’s Secret ‘Heating’ Button Can Make Anyone Go Viral](https://www.forbes.com/sites/emilybaker-white/2023/01/20/tiktoks-secret-heating-button-can-make-anyone-go-viral/)
- [Backpropagating Through Reasoning](https://thesephist.com/posts/backprop-through-reasoning/)
- ["A Recipe Is Just a Directed Acyclic Graph…"](https://bofh.org.uk/2019/03/04/recursive-sql-recipes/)
- [Chartbook #188 Archipelago Capitalism, the Bahamas and FTX](https://adamtooze.substack.com/p/chartbook-188-archipelago-capitalism)
- [As Disney Turns 100, Its Business Is on a Rollercoaster Ride](https://www.economist.com/briefing/2023/01/19/as-disney-turns-100-its-business-is-on-a-rollercoaster-ride)
- [Thoughts on the Python Packaging Ecosystem](https://pradyunsg.me/blog/2023/01/21/thoughts-on-python-packaging/)
- [After Self-Hosting My Email for Twenty-Three Years I Have Thrown in the Towel. The Oligopoly Has Won.](https://cfenollosa.com/blog/after-self-hosting-my-email-for-twenty-three-years-i-have-thrown-in-the-towel-the-oligopoly-has-won.html)
- [Internet Activities of U.S. Users November 2021](https://www.statista.com/statistics/183910/internet-activities-of-us-users/)


### pour comprendre les médias et leur économie

- [Subscribe Wherever You Get Your Content](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2023/subscribe-wherever-you-get-your-content/)
- [Faire Sortir Les Citoyens De Leur Zone De Confort](https://hypernews.co/sortir-citoyens-de-leur-zone-de-confort-polarisation-medias-information/)


### et entrenir une certaine faculté à me disperser

- [Bastien Vivès, Les Trucs Et Les Machins](https://www.arretsurimages.net/chroniques/initiales-ds/bastien-vives-les-trucs-et-les-machins)
- [‘Evil’, ‘Peasants’ and ‘Vomit’ – Eva Green’s WhatsApp Messages Exude Star Quality](https://www.theguardian.com/film/2023/jan/24/evil-peasants-and-vomit-eva-greens-whatsapp-messages-exude-star-quality)
- [A Day in the Life of (Almost) Every Vending Machine in the World](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/apr/14/a-day-in-the-life-of-almost-every-vending-machine-in-the-world)
- [Standard Model of Cosmology Survives a Telescope’s Surprising Finds](https://www.quantamagazine.org/standard-model-of-cosmology-survives-jwsts-surprising-finds-20230120/)
- [League of Legends’ Stinker Cinematic Belies a Bigger Trend](https://www.polygon.com/23562774/league-of-legends-brink-of-infinity-cinematic-controversy-explained)

## jouer
